Chapter Two The policeman driving us to jail was Mr . Avery Gaston , but the men at the Esso station called him Shoe . A puzzling nickname since there was nothing remarkable about his shoes , or even his feet so far as I could see . The one thing about him was the smallness of his ears , the ears of a child , ears like little dried apricots . I fixed my eyes on them from the backseat and wondered why he wasn't called Ears . The three men followed us in a green pickup with a gun rack inside . They drove close to our bumper and blew the horn every few seconds . I jumped each time , and Rosaleen gave my leg a pat . In front of the Western Auto the men started a game of pulling alongside us and yelling things out the window , mostly things we couldn't make out because our windows were rolled up . People in the back of police cars were not given the benefit of door handles or window cranks , I noticed , so we were blessed to be chauffeured to jail in smothering heat , watching the men mouth things we were glad not to know . Rosaleen looked straight ahead and acted as if the men were insignificant houseflies buzzing at our screen door . I was the only one who could feel the way her thighs trembled , the whole backseat like a vibrating bed . Mr . Gaston , I said , those men aren't coming with us , are they ? His smile appeared in the rearview mirror . I can't say what men riled up like that will do . Before Main Street they tired of the amusement and sped off . I breathed easier , but when we pulled into the empty lot behind the police station , they were waiting on the back steps . The dealer tapped a flashlight against the palm of his hand . The other two held our church fans , waving them back and forth . When we got out of the car , Mr . Gaston put handcuffs on Rosaleen , fastening her arms behind her back . I walked so close to her I felt heat vapor trailing off her skin . She stopped ten yards short of the men and refused to budge . Now , look here , don't make me get out my gun , Mr . Gaston said . Usually the only time the police in Sylvan got to use their guns was when they got called out to shoot rattlesnakes in people's yards . Come on , Rosaleen , I said . What can they do to you with a policeman right here ? That was when the dealer lifted the flashlight over his head , then down , smashing it into Rosaleen's forehead . She dropped to her knees . I don't remember screaming , but the next thing I knew , Mr . Gaston had his hand clamped over my mouth . Hush , he said . Maybe now you feel like apologizing , the dealer said . Rosaleen tried to get to her feet , but without her hands it was hopeless . It took me and Mr . Gaston both to pull her up . Your black ass is gonna apologize one way or another , the dealer said , and he stepped toward Rosaleen . Hold on now , Franklin , said Mr . Gaston , moving us toward the door . Now's not the time . I'm not resting till she apologizes . That's the last I heard him yell before we got inside , where I had an overpowering impulse to kneel down and kiss the jailhouse floor . The only image I had for jails was from westerns at the movies , and this one was nothing like that . For one thing , it was painted pink and had flower print curtains in the window . It turned out we'd come in through the jailer's living quarters . His wife stepped in from the kitchen , greasing a muffin tin . Got you two more mouths to feed , Mr . Gaston said , and she went back to work without a smile of sympathy . He led us around to the front , where there were two rows of jail cells , all of them empty . Mr . Gaston removed Rosaleen's handcuffs and handed her a towel from the bathroom . She pressed it against her head while he filled out papers at a desk , followed by a period of poking around for keys in a file drawer . The jail cells smelled with the breath of drunk people . He put us in the first cell on the first row , where somebody had scratched the words Shit Throne across a bench attached to one wall . Nothing seemed quite real . We're in jail , I thought . We're in jail . When Rosaleen pulled back the towel , I saw an inch long gash across a puffy place high over her eyebrow . Is it hurting bad ? I asked . Some , she said . She circled the cell two or three times before sinking down onto the bench . T . Ray will get us out , I said . Uh huh . She didn't speak another word till Mr . Gaston opened the cell door about a half hour later . Come on , he said . Rosaleen looked hopeful for a moment . She actually started to lift herself up . He shook his head . You ain't going anywhere . Just the girl . At the door I held on to a cell bar like it was the long bone in Rosaleen's arm . I'll be back . All right ? All right , Rosaleen ? You go on , I'll manage . The caved in look of her face nearly did me in . The speedometer needle on T . Ray's truck wiggled so badly I couldn't make out whether it pointed to seventy or eighty . Leaning into the steering wheel , he jammed his foot onto the accelerator , let off , then jammed it again . The poor truck was rattling to the point I expected the hood to fly off and decapitate a couple of pine trees . I imagined that T . Ray was rushing home so he could start right away constructing pyramids of grits all through the house—a torture chamber of food staples , where I would go from one pile to the next , kneeling for hours on end with nothing but bathroom breaks . I didn't care . I couldn't think of anything but Rosaleen back there in jail . I squinted at him sideways . What about Rosaleen ? You have to get her out— You're lucky I got you out ! he yelled . But she can't stay there— She dumped snuff juice on three white men ! What the hell was she thinking ? And on Franklin Posey , for Christ's sake . She couldn't pick somebody normal ? He's the meanest nigger hater in Sylvan . He'd as soon kill her as look at her . But not really , I said . You don't mean he would really kill her . What I mean is , I wouldn't be surprised if he flat out killed her . My arms felt weak in their sockets . Franklin Posey was the man with the flashlight , and he was gonna kill Rosaleen . But then , hadn't I known this inside even before T . Ray ever said it ? He followed me up the stairs . I moved with deliberate slowness , anger suddenly building in me . How could he leave Rosaleen in jail like that ? As I stepped inside my room , he stopped at the doorway . I have to go settle the payroll for the pickers , he said . Don't you leave this room . You understand me ? You sit here and think about me coming back and dealing with you . Think about it real hard . You don't scare me , I said , mostly under my breath . He'd already turned to leave , but now he whirled back . What did you say ? You don't scare me , I repeated , louder this time . A brazen feeling had broken loose in me , a daring something that had been locked up in my chest . He stepped toward me , raising the back of his hand like he might bring it down across my face . You better watch your mouth . Go ahead , try and hit me ! I yelled . When he swung , I turned my face . It was a clean miss . I ran for the bed and scrambled onto the middle of it , breathing hard . My mother will never let you touch me again ! I shouted . Your mother ? His face was bright red . You think that goddamn woman gave a shit about you ? My mother loved me ! I cried . He threw back his head and let out a forced , bitter laugh . It's it's not funny , I said . He lunged toward the bed then , pressing his fists into the mattress , bringing his face so close I could see the tiny holes where his whiskers grew . I slid backward , toward the pillows , shoving my back into the headboard . Not funny ? he yelled . Not funny ? Why , it's the funniest goddamn thing I ever heard: you thinking your mother is your guardian angel . He laughed again . The woman could have cared less about you . That's not true , I said . It's not . And how would you know ? he said , still leaning toward me . A leftover smile pulled the corners of his mouth . I hate you ! I screamed . That stopped his smiling instantly . He stiffened . Why , you little bitch , he said . The color faded from his lips . Suddenly I felt ice cold , as if something dangerous had slipped into the room . I looked toward the window and felt a tremor slide along my spine . You listen to me , he said , his voice deadly calm . The truth is , your sorry mother ran off and left you . The day she died , she'd come back to get her things , that's all . You can hate me all you want , but she's the one who left you . The room turned absolutely silent . He brushed at something on his shirtfront , then walked to the door . After he left , I didn't move except to trace the bars of light on the bed with my finger . The sound of his boots banging down the stairs drifted away , and I took the pillows from underneath the bedspread and placed them around me like I was making an inner tube that might keep me afloat . I could understand her leaving him . But leaving me ? This would sink me forever . The bee jar sat on the bedside table , empty now . Sometime since this morning the bees had finally gotten around to flying off . I reached over and took the jar in my hands , and out came the tears I'd been holding on to , it seemed like for years . Your sorry mother ran off and left you . The day she died , she'd come back to get her things , that's all . God and Jesus , you make him take it back . The memory settled over me . The suitcase on the floor . The way they'd fought . My shoulders began to shake in a strange , uncontrollable way . I held the jar pressed between my breasts , hoping it would steady me , but I couldn't stop shaking , couldn't stop crying , and it frightened me , as though I'd been struck by a car I hadn't seen coming and was lying on the side of the road , trying to understand what had happened . I sat on the edge of the bed , replaying his words over and over . Each time there was a wrench in what felt like my heart . I don't know how long I sat there feeling broken to pieces . Finally I walked to the window and gazed out at the peach trees stretching halfway to North Carolina , the way they held up their leafy arms in gestures of pure beseeching . The rest was sky and air and lonely space . I looked down at the bee jar still clutched in my hand and saw a teaspoon of teardrops floating in the bottom . I unfastened the window screen and poured it out . The wind lifted it on her skirt tails and shook it over the blistered grass . How could she have left me ? I stood there several minutes looking out on the world , trying to understand . Little birds were singing , so perfect . That's when it came to me: What if my mother leaving wasn't true ? What if T . Ray had made it up to punish me ? I felt almost dizzy with relief . That was it . That had to be it . I mean , my father was Thomas Edison when it came to inventing punishments . Once after I'd back talked him , he'd told me my rabbit , Mademoiselle , had died , and I'd cried all night before I discovered her the next morning healthy as anything in her pen . He had to be making this up , too . Some things were not possible in this world . Children did not have two parents who refused to love them . One , maybe , but for pity's sake , not two . It had to be like he'd said before: she was cleaning out the closet the day of the accident . People cleaned out closets all the time . I took a breath to steady myself . You could say I'd never had a true religious moment , the kind where you know yourself spoken to by a voice that seems other than yourself , spoken to so genuinely you see the words shining on trees and clouds . But I had such a moment right then , standing in my own ordinary room . I heard a voice say , Lily Melissa Owens , your jar is open . In a matter of seconds I knew exactly what I had to do leave . I had to get away from T . Ray , who was probably on his way back this minute to do Lord knows what to me . Not to mention I had to get Rosaleen out of jail . The clock read 2:40 . I needed a solid plan , but I didn't have the luxury of sitting down to think one up . I grabbed my pink canvas duffel bag , the one I'd planned to use for overnights the minute anyone asked me . I took the thirty eight dollars I'd earned selling peaches and stuffed it into the bag with my seven best pairs of panties , the ones that had the days of the week printed across the backside . I dumped in socks , five pairs of shorts , tops , a nightgown , shampoo , brush , toothpaste , toothbrush , rubber bands for my hair , all the time watching the window . What else ? Catching sight of the map tacked on the wall , I snatched it down , not bothering to pry out the tacks . I reached under the mattress and pulled out my mother's picture , the gloves , and the wooden picture of black Mary , and tucked them down in the bag , too . Tearing a sheet of paper from last year's English notebook , I wrote a note , short and to the point: Dear T . Ray , Don't bother looking for me . Lily . PS . People who tell lies like you should rot in hell . When I checked the window , T . Ray was coming out of the orchard toward the house , fists balled , head plowed forward like a bull wanting to gore something . I propped the note on my dresser and stood a moment in the center of the room , wondering if I'd ever see it again . Good bye , I said , and there was a tiny sprig of sadness pushing up from my heart . Outside , I spied the broken space in the latticework that wrapped around the foundation of the house . Squeezing through , I disappeared into violet light and cobwebbed air . T . Ray's boots stomped across the porch . Lily ! Li leeeee ! I heard his voice sailing along the floorboards of the house . All of a sudden I caught sight of Snout sniffing at the spot where I'd crawled through . I backed deeper into the darkness , but she'd caught my scent and started barking her mangy head off . T . Ray emerged with my note crumpled in his hand , yelled at Snout to shut the hell up , and tore out in his truck , leaving plumes of exhaust all along the driveway . Walking along the weedy strip beside the highway for the second time that day , I was thinking how much older fourteen had made me . In the space of a few hours I'd become forty years old . The road stretched empty as far as I could see , with heat shimmer making the air seem wavy in places . If I managed to get Rosaleen free—an if so big it could have been the planet Jupiter—just where did I think we'd go ? Suddenly I stood still . Tiburon , South Carolina . Of course . The town written on the back of the black Mary picture . Hadn't I been planning to go there one of these days ? It made such perfect sense: my mother had been there . Or else she knew people there who'd cared enough to send her a nice picture of Jesus' mother . And who would ever think to look for us there ? I squatted beside the ditch and unfolded the map . Tiburon was a pencil dot beside the big red star of Columbia . T . Ray would check the bus station , so Rosaleen and I would have to hitchhike . How hard could that be ? You stand there with your thumb out and a person takes pity on you . A short distance past the church , Brother Gerald whizzed by in his white Ford . I saw his brake lights flicker . He backed up . I thought that was you , he said through the window . Where're you headed ? Town . Again ? What's the bag for ? I'm I'm taking some things to Rosaleen . She's in jail . Yeah , I know , he said , flinging open the passenger door . Get in , I'm heading there myself . I'd never been inside a preacher's car before . It's not that I expected a ton of Bibles stacked on the backseat , but I was surprised to see that , inside , it was like anybody else's car . You're going to see Rosaleen ? I said . The police called and asked me to press charges against her for stealing church property . They say she took some of our fans . You know anything about that ? It was only two fans— He jumped straight into his pulpit voice . In the eyes of God it doesn't matter whether it's two fans or two hundred . Stealing is stealing . She asked if she could take the fans , I said no , in plain English . She took them anyway . Now that's sin , Lily . Pious people have always gotten on my nerves . But she's deaf in one ear , I said . I think she just mixed up what you said . She's always doing that . T . Ray will tell her , 'Iron my two shirts , ' and she'll iron the blue shirts . A hearing problem . Well , I didn't know that , he said . Rosaleen would never steal a thing . They said she'd assaulted some men at the Esso station . It wasn't like that , I said . See , she was singing her favorite hymn , 'Were you there when they crucified my Lord ?' I don't believe those men are Christians , Brother Gerald , because they yelled at her to shut up with that blankety blank Jesus tune . Rosaleen said , 'You can curse me , but don't blaspheme the Lord Jesus .' But they kept right on . So she poured the juice from her snuff cup on their shoes . Maybe she was wrong , but in her mind she was standing up for Jesus . I was sweating through my top and all along the backs of my thighs . Brother Gerald dragged his teeth back and forth across his lip . I could tell he was actually weighing what I'd said . Chapter Six The next morning , inside the honey house , I woke to banging in the yard . When I pulled myself off the cot and wandered outside , I found the tallest Negro man I'd ever seen working on the truck , bent over the motor , tools scattered around his feet . June handed him wrenches and what have you , cocking her head and beaming at him . In the kitchen May and Rosaleen were working on pancake batter . I didn't like pancakes that much , but I didn't say so . I was just thankful it wasn't grits . After kneeling on them half your life , you don't care to eat them . The trash can was full of banana peels , and the electric percolator bubbled into the tiny glass nozzle on top of it . Bloop , bloop . I loved the way it sounded , the way it smelled . Who's the man out there ? I asked . That's Neil , said May . He's sweet on June . It looks to me like June is sweet on him , too . Yeah , but she won't say so , said May . She's kept that poor man strung along for years . Won't marry him and won't let him go . May drizzled batter on the griddle in the shape of a big L . This one's yours , she said . L for Lily . Rosaleen set the table and warmed the honey in a bowl of hot water . I poured orange juice into the jelly glasses . How come June won't get married to him ? I asked . She was supposed to get married to somebody else a long time ago , said May . But he didn't show up for the wedding . I looked at Rosaleen , afraid this situation of jilted love might be unfortunate enough to send May into one of her episodes , but she was intent on my pancake . It struck me for the first time how odd it was that none of them were married . Three unmarried sisters living together like this . I heard Rosaleen make a sound like Hmmmph , and I knew she was thinking about her own sorry husband , wishing he hadn't shown up for their ceremony . June swore off men and said she would never get married , and then she met Neil when he came to be the new principal at her school . I don't know what happened to his wife , but he didn't have one anymore after he moved here . He has tried every which way to get June to marry him , but she won't do it . Me and August can't convince her either . A wheeze welled up from May's chest , and then out came Oh ! Susanna . Here we go . Lord , not again , said Rosaleen . I'm sorry , May said . I just can't help it . Why don't you go out to the wall ? I said , prying the spatula out of her hand . It's okay . Yeah , Rosaleen told her . You do what you gotta do . We watched from the screen door as May cut past June and Neil . A few minutes later June came in with Neil behind her . I worried that his head wouldn't clear the door . What started May off ? June wanted to know . Her eyes followed a roach that darted beneath the refrigerator . You didn't step on a roach in front of her , did you ? No , I said . We didn't even see a roach . She opened the cabinet under the sink and dug into the back for a pump can of bug killer . I thought about explaining to her my mother's ingenious method of ridding the house of roaches cracker crumbs and marshmallow but then I thought , This is June , forget it . Well , what upset her , then ? June asked . I hated to come out and say it with Neil standing right there , but Rosaleen didn't have any problem with it . She's upset you won't marry Neil . I had never considered until then that colored people could blush , or maybe it was anger that turned June's face and ears such a dark plum color . Neil laughed . See there . You should marry me and quit upsetting your sister . Oh , get out of here , she said , and gave him a push . You promised me pancakes , and I'm gonna have them , he said . He wore blue jeans and an undershirt with grease smears on it , along with horn rimmed glasses . He looked like a very studious mechanic . He smiled at me and then Rosaleen . So are you gonna introduce me or keep me in the dark ? I have noticed that if you look carefully at people's eyes the first five seconds they look at you , the truth of their feelings will shine through for just an instant before it flickers away . June's eyes turned dull and hard when she looked at me . This is Lily and Rosaleen , she said . They're visiting for a while . Where do you come from ? he asked me . This is the number one most asked question in all of South Carolina . We want to know if you are one of us , if your cousin knows our cousin , if your little sister went to school with our big brother , if you go to the same Baptist church as our ex boss . We are looking for ways our stories fit together . It was rare , though , for Negroes to ask white people where they're from , because there was nothing much to be gained from it , as their stories weren't that likely to link up . Spartanburg County , I said , having to pause and remember what I'd said earlier . And you ? he said to Rosaleen . She stared at the copper Jell O molds that hung on either side of the window over the sink . Same place as Lily . What's that burning ? said June . Smoke poured off the griddle . The L shaped pancake had burned to a crisp . June yanked the spatula from my fingers , scraped up the mess , and dropped it into the trash . How long are you planning on staying ? Neil asked . June stared at me . Waiting . Her lips pinched tight along her teeth . A while longer , I answered , looking over into the garbage can . L for Lily . I could feel the questions gathering in him , knew I could not face them . I'm not hungry , I said , and walked out the back door . Crossing the back porch , I heard Rosaleen say to him , Have you registered yourself to vote ? On Sunday I thought they would go to church , but no , they held a special service in the pink house , and people came to them . It was a group called the Daughters of Mary , which August had organized . The Daughters of Mary started showing up in the parlor before 10:00 A .M . First was an old woman named Queenie and her grown daughter , Violet . They were dressed alike in bright yellow skirts and white blouses , though they wore different hats , at least . Next came Lunelle , Mabelee , and Cressie , who wore the fanciest hats I'd ever laid eyes on . It turned out Lunelle was a hatmaker without the least bit of shyness . I'm talking about purple felt the size of a sombrero with fake fruit on the back . That was Lunelle's . Mabelee wore a creation of tiger fur wrapped with gold fringe , but it was Cressie who carried the day in a crimson smokestack with black netting and ostrich feathers . If this was not enough , they wore clip on earbobs of various colored rhinestones and circles of rouge on their brown cheeks . I thought they were beautiful . In addition to all these Daughters , it turned out Mary had one son besides Jesus , a man named Otis Hill , with stubby teeth , in an oversize navy suit , so technically the group was the Daughters and Son of Mary . He'd come with his wife , who was known to everyone as Sugar Girl . She wore a white dress , turquoise cotton gloves , and an emerald green turban on her head . August and June , hatless , gloveless , earbobless , looked practically poverty stricken next to them , but May , good old May , had tied on a bright blue hat with the brim up on one side and down on the other . August had brought in chairs and arranged them in a semicircle facing the wooden statue of Mary . When we were all seated , she lit the candle and June played the cello . We said the Hail Marys together , Queenie and Violet moving strings of wooden beads through their fingers . August stood up and said she was glad me and Rosaleen were with them; then she opened a Bible and read , And Mary said Behold , from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed . For he that is mighty hath done to me great things . He hath scattered the proud . He hath put down the mighty from their seats , and exalted them of low degree . He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away . Laying the Bible in her chair , she said , It's been a while since we've told the story of Our Lady of Chains , and since we have visitors who've never heard the story of our statue , I thought we'd tell it again . One thing I was starting to understand was that August loved to tell a good story . Really , it's good for all of us to hear it again , she said . Stories have to be told or they die , and when they die , we can't remember who we are or why we're here . Cressie nodded , making the ostrich feathers wave through the air so you had the impression of a real bird in the room . That's right . Tell the story , she said . August pulled her chair close to the statue of black Mary and sat facing us . When she began , it didn't sound like August talking at all but like somebody talking through her , someone from another time and place . All the while her eyes looked off toward the window , like she was seeing the drama play out in the sky . Well , she said , back in the time of slaves , when the people were beaten down and kept like property , they prayed every day and every night for deliverance . On the islands near Charleston , they would go to the praise house and sing and pray , and every single time someone would ask the Lord to send them rescue . To send them consolation . To send them freedom . I could tell she had repeated those opening lines a thousand times , that she was saying them the exact way she'd heard them coming from the lips of some old woman , who'd heard them from the lips of an even older one , the way they came out like a song , with rhythms that rocked us to and fro till we had left the premises and were , ourselves , on the islands of Charleston looking for rescue . One day , August said , a slave named Obadiah was loading bricks onto a boat that would sail down the Ashley River , when he saw something washed up on the bank . Coming closer , he saw it was the wooden figure of a woman . Her body was growing out of a block of wood , a black woman with her arm lifted out and her fist balled up . At this point August stood up and struck the pose herself . She looked just like the statue standing there , her right arm raised and her hand clutched into a fist . She stayed like that for a few seconds while we sat , spellbound . Obadiah pulled the figure out of the water , she went on , and struggled to set her upright . Then he remembered how they'd asked the Lord to send them rescue . To send them consolation . To send them freedom . Obadiah knew the Lord had sent this figure , but he didn't know who she was . He knelt down in the marsh mud before her and heard her voice speak plain as day in his heart . She said , 'It's all right . I'm here . I'll be taking care of you now .' This story was ten times better than Beatrix the nun . August glided back and forth across the room as she spoke . Obadiah tried to pick up the waterlogged woman who God had sent to take care of them , but she was too heavy , so he went and got two more slaves , and between them they carried her to the praise house and set her on the hearth . By the time the next Sunday came , everyone had heard about the statue washing up from the river , how it had spoken to Obadiah . The praise house was filled with people spilling out the door and sitting on the window ledges . Obadiah told them he knew the Lord God had sent her , but he didn't know who she was . He didn't know who she was ! cried Sugar Girl , breaking in to the story . Then all the Daughters of Mary broke loose , saying over and over , Not one of them knew . I looked over at Rosaleen , who I hardly recognized for the way she leaned forward in her chair , chanting along with them . When everything had quieted down , August said , Now , the oldest of the slaves was a woman named Pearl . She walked with a stick , and when she spoke , everyone listened . She got to her feet and said , 'This here is the mother of Jesus .' Everyone knew the mother of Jesus was named Mary , and that she'd seen suffering of every kind . That she was strong and constant and had a mother's heart . And here she was , sent to them on the same waters that had brought them here in chains . It seemed to them she knew everything they suffered . I stared at the statue , feeling the fractured place in my heart . And so , August said , the people cried and danced and clapped their hands . They went one at a time and touched their hands to her chest , wanting to grab on to the solace in her heart . They did this every Sunday in the praise house , dancing and touching her chest , and eventually they painted a red heart on her breast so the people would have a heart to touch . Our Lady filled their hearts with fearlessness and whispered to them plans of escape . The bold ones fled , finding their way north , and those who didn't lived with a raised fist in their hearts . And if ever it grew weak , they would only have to touch her heart again . She grew so powerful she became known even to the master . One day he hauled her off on a wagon and chained her in the carriage house . But then , without any human help , she escaped during the night and made her way back to the praise house . The master chained her in the barn fifty times , and fifty times she loosed the chains and went home . Finally he gave up and let her stay there . The room grew quiet as August stood there a minute , letting everything sink in . When she spoke again , she raised her arms out beside her . The people called her Our Lady of Chains . They called her that not because she wore chains Not because she wore chains , the Daughters chanted . They called her Our Lady of Chains because she broke them . June wedged the cello between her legs and played Amazing Grace , and the Daughters of Mary got to their feet and swayed together like colorful seaweed on the ocean floor . I thought this was the grand finale , but no , June switched over to the piano and banged out a jazzed up version of Go Tell It on the Mountain . That's when August started a conga line . She danced over to Lunelle , who latched on to August's waist . Cressie hooked on to Lunelle , followed by Mabelee , and off they went around the room , causing Cressie to grab hold of her crimson hat . When they swung back by , Queenie and Violet joined them , then Sugar Girl . I wanted to be part of it , too , but I only watched , and so did Rosaleen and Otis . June seemed to play faster and faster . I fanned my face , trying to get a little air , feeling light headed . When the dance ended , the Daughters stood panting in a half circle before Our Lady of Chains , and what they did next took my breath away . One at a time they went and touched the statue's fading red heart . Queenie and her daughter went together and rubbed their palms against the wood . Lunelle pressed her fingers to Mary's heart , then kissed each one of them in a slow , deliberate way , a way that brought tears to my eyes . Otis pressed his forehead to the heart , standing there the longest time of them all , head to heart , like he was filling up his empty tank . June kept playing while each of them came , until there was only Rosaleen and me left . May nodded to June to keep on with the music and took Rosaleen's hand , pulling her to Our Lady of Chains , so even Rosaleen got to touch Mary's heart . I wanted to touch her vanishing red heart , too , as much as anything I'd ever wanted . As I rose from my chair , my head was still swimming some . I walked toward black Mary with my hand lifted . But just as I was about to reach her , June stopped playing . She stopped right in the middle of the song , and I was left in the silence with my hand stretched out . Drawing it back , I looked around me , and it was like seeing everything through a train's thick window . A blur passed before me . A moving wave of color . I am not one of you , I thought . My body felt numb . I thought how nice it would be to grow smaller and smaller until I was a dot of nothing . I heard August scolding , June , what got into you ? but her voice was so distant . I called to the Lady of Chains , but maybe I wasn't really saying her name out loud , only hearing myself call on the inside . That's the last I remember . Her name echoing through the empty spaces . When I woke , I was lying on August's bed across the hall with an ice cold washcloth folded over my forehead and August and Rosaleen staring down at me . Rosaleen had pulled up the skirt of her dress and was fanning me with it , showing most of her thighs . Since when have you started fainting ? she said , and sat down on the edge of the bed , causing me to roll into her side . She scooped me into her arms . For some reason this caused my chest to fill with more sadness than I could bear , and I wrestled myself free , claiming I needed a drink of water . Maybe it was the heat , August said . I should've turned on the fans . It must've been ninety degrees in there . I'm all right , I told them , but to tell the truth , I was bewildered at myself . I felt I'd stumbled upon an amazing secret it was possible to close your eyes and exit life without actually dying . You just had to faint . Only I didn't know how to make it happen , how to pull the plug so I could drain away when I needed to . My fainting spell had broken up the Daughters of Mary and sent May to the wailing wall . June had gone upstairs to her room and locked the door , while the Daughters huddled in the kitchen . We chalked it up to heat . Heat , we said . Heat would make a person do strange things . You should have seen how August and Rosaleen fussed over me the rest of the evening . You want some root beer , Lily ? How about a feather pillow ? Here , swallow this spoon of honey . We sat in the den , where I ate supper off a tray , which was a privilege in itself . June was still in her room , not answering August's calls at the door , and May , who wasn't allowed near the TV because she'd already spent way too much time today at the wall , was in the kitchen clipping recipes from McCall's magazine . On the television Mr . Cronkite said they were going to send a rocket ship to the moon . On July twenty eighth , the United States of America will launch Ranger Seven from Cape Kennedy , Florida , he said . It was going to take a 253 , 665 mile flight before it crash landed onto the moon . The whole point was to take pictures of the surface and send them back . Well , baby Jesus , said Rosaleen . A rocket to the moon . August shook her head . Next they'll be walking around up there . We had all thought President Kennedy was off his rocker when he declared we'd land a man on the moon . The Sylvan newspaper had called it a Luna tic Vision . I took the article to class for the current events bulletin board . We all said , A man on the moon . Right . But you can never underestimate the power of cutthroat competition . We wanted to beat the Russians that was what made the world go around for us . Now it looked like we would . August cut off the TV set . I need some air . We all went , Rosaleen and August holding on to my elbows in case I started to keel over again . It was the in between time , before day leaves and night comes , a time I've never been partial to because of the sadness that lingers in the space between going and coming . August gazed at the sky where the moon was rising , large and ghostly silver . Look at her good , Lily , she said , 'cause you're seeing the end of something . I am ? Yes , you are , because as long as people have been on this earth , the moon has been a mystery to us . Think about it . She is strong enough to pull the oceans , and when she dies away , she always comes back again . My mama used to tell me Our Lady lived on the moon and that I should dance when her face was bright and hibernate when it was dark . August stared at the sky a long moment and then , turning toward the house , said , Now it won't ever be the same , not after they've landed up there and walked around on her . She'll be just one more big science project . I thought about the dream I'd had that night Rosaleen and I slept by the pond , how the moon had cracked to pieces . August disappeared into the house , and Rosaleen headed for her cot in the honey house , but I stayed on and stared at the sky , imagining Ranger 7 blasting away for it . I knew one day I would go back into the parlor when no one was around and touch the Lady's heart . Then I would show August the picture of my mother and see if the moon broke loose and fell out of the sky . How did bees ever become equated with sex ? They do not live a riotous sex life themselves . A hive suggests cloister more than bordello . I jumped every time I heard a siren . It might have been an ambulance off in the distance or a police chase on television—it didn't matter . Part of me was always braced for T . Ray or Mr . Shoe Gaston to drive up and end my charmed life . We had been at August's house eight whole days . I didn't know how long black Mary could keep the curtain drawn . On Monday morning , July 13 , I was walking back to the honey house after breakfast when I noticed a strange black Ford parked in the driveway . I lost my breath for a moment , till I remembered Zach was coming back to work today . It would be me and August and Zach . I'm not proud of it , but I resented the intrusion . He was not what I expected . I found him inside holding a honey drizzle like a microphone , singing , I found my thrill on Blueberry Hill . I watched unseen from the doorway , not making a sound , but when he launched into Viva Las Vegas , slinging his hips around Elvis style , I broke out laughing . He whirled around , knocking over a tray of brood frames , which made a great big mess all over the floor . I was just singing , he said , like this was news to me . Who are you anyway ? Lily , I said . I'm staying with August and them for a while . I'm Zachary Taylor , he said . Zachary Taylor was a president , I told him . Yeah , so I've heard . He fished out a dogtag suspended on a chain under his shirt and held it up to my nose . See right there . Zachary Lincoln Taylor . He smiled then , and I saw he had a one side dimple . It's a feature that has always gotten to me . He went and got a towel and cleaned up the floor . August told me about you being here and helping us out , but she didn't say anything about you being . . . white . Yep , I'm white , all right , I said . White as can be . There was nothing white about Zachary Lincoln Taylor . Even the whites of his eyes weren't exactly white . He had broad shoulders and a narrow waist and short cropped hair like most of the Negro boys wore , but it was his face I couldn't help staring at . If he was shocked over me being white , I was shocked over him being handsome . At my school they made fun of colored people's lips and noses . I myself had laughed at these jokes , hoping to fit in . Now I wished I could pen a letter to my school to be read at opening assembly that would tell them how wrong we'd all been . You should see Zachary Taylor , I'd say . I wondered how August could forget to tell him a thing like the fact that I was white . She'd told me plenty about him . I knew she was his godmother . That his daddy had left him when he was small , that his mama worked as a lunchroom lady at the same school where June taught . He was about to be a junior at the black high school , where he made all A's and played halfback on the football team . She'd said he ran like the wind , which might be his ticket to a college up north . This had struck me as better than I would manage , since I was probably headed for beauty school now . I said , August went out to the Satterfield farm to check on some hives . She said I should help you in here . What do you want me to do ? Grab some frames from the hive boxes over there and help me load the uncapper , I guess . So who do you like best , Fats Domino or Elvis ? I asked , dropping in the first frame . Miles Davis , he said . I don't know who that is . Of course you don't . But he's the best trumpet player in the world . I'd give anything to play like him . Would you give up football ? How do you know I play football ? I know things , I said , and smiled at him . I can see that . He was trying not to smile back . I thought , We're going to be friends . He flipped the switch , and the extractor started to spin , building speed . So how come you're staying here ? Me and Rosaleen are on our way to Virginia to live with my aunt . My daddy died in a tractor accident , and I haven't had a mother since I was little , so I'm trying to get to my family up there before I get put in an orphanage or something . But how come you're here ? Oh , you mean at August's . We were hitchhiking and got let out at Tiburon . We knocked on August's door , and she gave us a bed . That's it . He nodded like this made some kind of actual sense . How long have you worked here ? I asked , happy to change the subject . All through high school . I come after school when it's not football season , every Saturday and all summer . I bought a car with the money I made last year . That Ford out there ? Yeah , it's a '59 Ford Fairlane , he said . He flipped the switch on the extractor again , and the machine groaned while it came to a stop . Come on , I'll show you . I could see my face in the surface of it . I figured he stayed up nights polishing it with his undershirts . I walked along giving it the white glove inspection . You can teach me to drive , I said . Not in this car . Why not ? Because you look like the kind of girl who'll wreck something for sure . I turned to face him , ready to defend myself , and saw he was grinning . And there was the one side dimple again . For sure , he said . Wreck something for sure . Every day Zach and I worked in the honey house . August and Zach had already extracted most of the honey from her bee yards , but there were still several stacks of supers on pallets sitting around . We ran the warmer and caught the wax in a tin tub , then loaded the frames into the extractor and filtered the honey through brand new nylon hose . August liked to keep a little pollen in her honey because it was good for people , so we saw to that , too . Sometimes we broke off pieces of comb and pushed them down into the jars before we filled them . You had to make sure they were new combs with no brood eggs in them , since nobody wanted to have baby bee larvae in their honey . And if we weren't doing all that , we were filling candle molds with beeswax and washing mason jars till my hands turned stiff as corn husk from detergent . The only part of the day I dreaded was dinner , when I had to be around June . You'd think anybody who played music for dying people would be a nicer person . I couldn't understand why she resented me so much . Somehow even me being white and imposing on their hospitality didn't seem enough reason . How are things coming with you , Lily ? she'd say every night at the table . Like she'd rehearsed this in the mirror . I'd say , Things are coming fine . And how are they coming with you , June ? She would glance at August , who would be following all this like she was overcome with interest . Fine , June would say . Having gotten that out of the way , we would shake out our napkins and do our best to ignore each other the rest of the meal . I knew that August was trying to correct June's rudeness toward me , but I wanted to say to her , Do you think me and June Boatwright give a damn how each other is coming ? Just give up . One night after the Hail Marys , August said , Lily , if you wish to touch Our Lady's heart , you're welcome , isn't she , June ? I glanced at June , who gave me a forced smile . Maybe some other time , I said . I'm here to tell you , if I was dying on my cot in the honey house and the only thing that could save me was June's change of heart , I would meet my death and shoot straight to heaven . Or maybe hell . I wasn't even sure anymore . The best meal was lunch , which Zach and I ate under the cool of the pine trees . May fixed us bologna sandwiches nearly every single day . We could also count on candlestick salad , which meant half a banana standing up in a pineapple slice . Let me light your candle , she'd say , and strike an imaginary match . Then she'd fasten a bottled cherry on the tip of the banana with a toothpick . Like Zach and I were still in kindergarten . But we'd go along with her , acting all excited over her lighting the banana . For dessert we crunched cubes of lime Kool Aid , which she'd frozen in ice trays . One day we sat on the grass after lunch , listening to the wind snap the sheets Rosaleen had hung on the clothesline . What's your favorite subject in school ? Zach asked . English . I bet you like to write themes , he said , rolling his eyes . As a matter of fact I do . I was planning on being a writer and an English teacher in my spare time . Was planning ? he said . I don't think I have much of a future now , being an orphan . What I meant was being a fugitive from the law . Considering the state of things , I didn't know if I'd even get back to high school . He studied his fingers . I could smell the sharp scent of his sweat . He had patches of honey on his shirt , which were attracting a horde of flies and causing him to swat incessantly . After a while he said , Me either . You either what ? I don't know if I'll have much of a future either . Why not ? You're not an orphan . No , he said . I'm a Negro . I felt embarrassed . Well , you could play football for a college team and then be a professional player . Why is it sports is the only thing white people see us being successful at ? I don't want to play football , he said . I wanna be a lawyer . That's fine with me , I said , a little annoyed . I've just never heard of a Negro lawyer , that's all . You've got to hear of these things before you can imagine them . Bullshit . You gotta imagine what's never been . I closed my eyes . All right then , I'm imagining a Negro lawyer . You are a Negro Perry Mason . People are coming to you from all over the state , wrong accused people , and you get at the truth at the very last minute by tricking the real criminal on the witness stand . Yeah , he said , I bust their ass with the truth . When he laughed , his tongue was grass green from Kool Aid . I started calling him Zach the ass busting lawyer . Oh , look who's here , Zach the ass busting lawyer , I'd say . It was along about this point Rosaleen started asking me what did I think I was doing—auditioning myself to get adopted by the calendar sisters ? She said I was living in a dream world . Dream world became her favorite two words . It was living in a dream world to pretend we had a regular life when there was a manhunt going on , to think we could stay here forever , to believe I would find out anything worth knowing about my mother . Every time I shot back , What's wrong with living in a dream world ? And she'd say , You have to wake up . One afternoon when I was alone in the honey house , June wandered in looking for August . Or so she said . She crossed her arms over her chest . So , she said , you've been here—what ? Two weeks now ? How obvious can you get ? Look , if you want us to leave , me and Rosaleen will be on our way , I said . I'll write my aunt , and she'll send us bus money . She raised her eyebrows . I thought you didn't remember your aunt's last name , and now you know her name and her address . Actually , I knew it all along , I said . I was just hoping for a little time before we had to leave . It seemed like her face softened some when I said that , but it could've been wishful thinking on my part . Heavens to Betsy , what's this talk about you leaving ? said August , standing in the doorway . Neither one of us had seen her come in . She gave June a hard look . Nobody wants you to leave , Lily , till you're good and ready . Standing beside August's desk , I fidgeted with a stack of papers . June cleared her throat . Well , I need to get back and practice , she said , and breezed out the door . August walked over and sat down in her desk chair . Lily , you can talk to me . You know that , don't you ? When I didn't answer , she caught my hand and drew me to her , pulling me right down onto her lap . It was not mattress deep like Rosaleen's but thin and angular . I wanted nothing more than to come clean with her . Go pull my bag from underneath the cot and bring out my mother's things . I wanted to produce the black Mary picture and say , This belonged to my mother , this exact same , identical picture you put on your honey jars . And it has Tiburon , South Carolina , written on the back , so I know she must've been here . I wanted to hold up her photograph and say , Have you ever seen her ? Take your time now . Think carefully . But I hadn't yet pressed my hand to the black Mary's heart in the parlor , and I was too afraid to say all this without having done at least that . I leaned against August's chest , pushing aside my secret wanting , too afraid she'd say , No , I never saw this woman in my life . And that would be that . Not knowing anything at all was better . I struggled to my feet . I guess I'll go help in the kitchen . I crossed the yard without a glance back . That night , when the darkness was weighed down with singing crickets and Rosaleen was snoring right along with them , I had myself a good cry . I couldn't even say why . Just everything , I guess . Because I hated lying to August when she was so good to me . Because Rosaleen was probably right about dream worlds . Because I was pretty sure the Virgin Mary was not back there on the peach farm standing in for me the way she'd stood in for Beatrix . Neil came over most evenings and sat with June in the parlor while the rest of us watched The Fugitive on television in the den . August said she wished the fugitive would go ahead and find the one armed man and get it over with . During commercials I pretended to go for water and instead crept down the hall , where I tried to make out what June and Neil were saying . Chapter Nine July 28 was a day for the record books . I look back on it and what comes to me are people going over Niagara Falls in barrels . Ever since I'd heard about that , I'd tried to imagine people crouched inside , bobbing along peacefully like a rubber duck in a child's bathtub , and suddenly the water turning choppy and the barrel starting to thrash around while a roar grows in the distance . I knew they were in there saying , Shitbucket , what was I thinking ? At eight o'clock in the morning it hit 94 , with the ambitious plan of reaching 103 before noon . I woke up with August shaking my shoulder , saying it was gonna be a scorcher , get up , we had to water the bees . I climbed into the honey wagon with my hair uncombed , with May handing me buttered toast and orange juice through the window and Rosaleen sticking in thermoses of water , both of them practically running alongside the truck while August rolled out of the driveway . I felt like the Red Cross springing to action to save the bee queendom . In the back of the truck August had gallons of sugar water already made up . When it gets over a hundred , she said , the flowers dry up and there's no food for the bees . They stay in the hives fanning themselves . Sometimes they just roast . I felt like we might roast alive ourselves . You could not touch the door handle for fear of a third degree burn . Sweat ran between my breasts and sopped my underwear band . August turned on the radio for the weather , but what we heard was how Ranger 7 had finally been launched to the moon in a place called the Sea of Clouds , how police were looking for the bodies of those three civil rights workers in Mississippi , and the terrible things happening in Vietnam . It ended with a story about what was happening closer to home , how black people from Tiburon , Florence , and Orangeburg were marching today all the way to Columbia asking the governor to enforce the Civil Rights Act . August turned it off . Enough was enough . You cannot fix the whole world . I've already watered the hives around the house , she said . Zach is taking care of the hives on the east side of the county . So you and I've got the west side . Rescuing bees took us the entire morning . Driving back into remote corners of the woods where there were barely roads , we would come upon twenty five beehives up on slats like a little lost city tucked back in there . We lifted the covers and filled the feeders with sugar water . Earlier we'd spooned dry sugar into our pockets , and now , just as a bonus , we sprinkled it on the feeding rims . I managed to get stung on my wrist while replacing a lid onto a hive box . August scraped out the stinger . I was sending them love , I said , feeling betrayed . August said , Hot weather makes the bees out of sorts , I don't care how much love you send them . She pulled a small bottle of olive oil and bee pollen from her free pocket and rubbed my skin—her patented remedy . It was something I'd hoped never to test out . Count yourself initiated , she said . You can't be a true beekeeper without getting stung . A true beekeeper . The words caused a fullness in me , and right at that moment an explosion of blackbirds lifted off the ground in a clearing a short distance away and filled up the whole sky . I said to myself , Will wonders never cease ? I would add that to my list of careers . A writer , an English teacher , and a beekeeper . Do you think I could keep bees one day ? I asked . August said , Didn't you tell me this past week one of the things you loved was bees and honey ? Now , if that's so , you'll be a fine beekeeper . Actually , you can be bad at something , Lily , but if you love doing it , that will be enough . The sting shot pain all the way to my elbow , causing me to marvel at how much punishment a minuscule creature can inflict . I'm prideful enough to say I didn't complain . After you get stung , you can't get unstung no matter how much you whine about it . I just dived back into the riptide of saving bees . When we had watered all the hives of Tiburon and sprinkled enough sugar to cause a human being to gain fifty pounds , we drove home hot , hungry , and nearly drowned in our own sweat . Pulling into the driveway , we found Rosaleen and May sipping sweet tea on the back porch . May said she'd left our lunches in the refrigerator , cold pork chop sandwiches and slaw . While we ate , we heard June upstairs in her room playing the cello like something had died . We scarfed down every morsel without talking , then pushed back from the table . We were wondering how to get our tired selves to a standing position when we heard squealing and laughing , the kind you're apt to hear at a school recess . August and I dragged ourselves to the porch to see . And there were May and Rosaleen running through the water sprinkler , barefoot and fully clothed . They had gone berserk . Rosaleen's muumuu was sopped and plastered to her body , and May was catching water in the bowl of her dress skirt and tossing it up across her face . Sunlight hit the hair sheen on her braids and lit them up . Well , isn't this the living end ? August said . When we got out there , Rosaleen picked up the sprinkler and aimed it at us . You come over here and you gonna get wet , she said , and splat ! we were hit full in the chest with ice cold water . Rosaleen turned the sprinkler head down and filled May's dress . You come over here and you gonna get wet , May said , echoing Rosaleen , and she came after us , pitching the contents of her skirt across our backs . I can tell you this much: neither one of us protested that loudly . In the end we stood there and let ourselves be drenched by two crazy black women . All four of us turned into water nymphs and danced around the cool spray , just the way it must have been when Indians danced circles around blazing fires . Squirrels and Carolina wrens hopped as close as they dared and drank from the puddles , and you could almost see the blades of brown grass lift themselves up and turn green . Then the porch door banged , and here came June with her dander up . I must have been drunk with water and air and dancing , because I picked up the sprinkler and said , You come over here and you're gonna get wet . Then I hosed her . She began to holler . Damn it to hell ! I knew this was going down the wrong path , but I couldn't stop . I was seeing myself as the fire department and June as the raging inferno . She yanked the sprinkler out of my hands and turned the spray on me . Some of the water rushed up my nose and burned . I yanked at the sprinkler , and each of us held on to one side of it while it blasted away at our stomachs and chins . We went to our knees , wrestling for it , the geyser weaving between us , her eyes staring at me , close and bright with beads of water on her eyelashes . I heard May start to hum Oh ! Susanna . I laughed to let her know it was all right , but I wouldn't let go . I would not let June Boatwright win . Rosaleen said , They say if you aim the hose on two locked dogs , they'll turn loose , but I guess that ain't always so . August laughed , and I saw the softening come around June's eyes , how she was trying not to laugh , but it was like the Dutch boy pulling his finger out of the dike—the minute she softened her eyes , the whole thing collapsed . I could almost see her smack her forehead , thinking , I am wrestling with a fourteen year old girl over a garden sprinkler . This is ridiculous . She let go and sprawled back on the grass in convulsions of laughter . I plopped down next to her and laughed , too . We could not stop . I wasn't exactly sure of everything we were laughing about—I was just glad we were doing it together . When we got up , June said , Lord , I feel woozy , like somebody has pulled the plugs in my feet and drained me out . Rosaleen , May , and August had returned to the business of being water nymphs . I looked back down at the ground where our bodies had lain side by side , the wet grasses pressed down , perfect depressions in the earth . I stepped over them with the utmost care , and , seeing how careful I was , June stepped over them , too , and then , to my shock , she hugged me . June Boatwright hugged me while our clothes made sweet , squishy sounds up and down our bodies . If the heat goes over 104 degrees in South Carolina , you have to go to bed . It is practically the law . Some people might see it as shiftless behavior , but really , when we're lying down from the heat , we're giving our minds time to browse around for new ideas , wondering at the true aim of life , and generally letting things pop into our heads that need to . In the sixth grade there was a boy in my class who had a steel plate in his skull and was always complaining how test answers could never get through to him . Our teacher would say , Give me a break . In a way , though , the boy was right . Every human being on the face of the earth has a steel plate in his head , but if you lie down now and then and get still as you can , it will slide open like elevator doors , letting in all the secret thoughts that have been standing around so patiently , pushing the button for a ride to the top . The real troubles in life happen when those hidden doors stay closed for too long . But that's just my opinion . August , May , June , and Rosaleen were supposedly over in the pink house in their rooms lying under the fans with the lights out . In the honey house I reclined on my cot and told myself I could think about anything I wanted , except my mother , so naturally she was the only thing that wanted on the elevator . I could feel things unraveling around me . All the fraying edges of the dream world . Pull one wrong thread and I would be standing in wreckage to my elbows . Ever since I'd called T . Ray , I'd wanted so badly to tell Rosaleen about it . To say , If you've been wondering whether my leaving has caused T . Ray to examine his heart , or change his ways , don't waste your time . But I couldn't bring myself to admit to her that I'd cared enough to call him . What was wrong with me that I was living here as if I had nothing to hide ? I lay on the cot and stared at the glaring square of window , exhausted . It takes so much energy to keep things at bay . Let me on , my mother was saying . Let me on the damn elevator . Well , fine . I pulled out my bag and examined my mother's picture . I wondered what it had been like to be inside her , just a curl of flesh swimming in her darkness , the quiet things that had passed between us . The wanting her was still in me , but it wasn't nearly so fierce and raging as before . Pulling on her gloves , I noticed how tight they fit all of a sudden . By the time I was sixteen , they would feel like baby gloves on my hands . I would be Alice in Wonderland after she ate the cake and grew twice her size . My palms would split the seams of the gloves , and I would never wear them again . I peeled the gloves from my sweaty hands and felt a wave of jitteriness , the old saw edged guilt , the necklace of lies I could not stop wearing , the fear of being cast out of the pink house . No , I breathed . The word took a long time to work its way to my throat . A scared whisper . No , I will not think about this . I will not feel this . I will not let this ruin the way things are . No . I decided that lying down from the heat was a hick idea . I gave up and walked to the pink house for something cold to drink . If I ever managed to get to heaven after everything I'd done , I hoped I would get just a few minutes for a private conference with God . I wanted to say , Look , I know you meant well creating the world and all , but how could you let it get away from you like this ? How come you couldn't stick with your original idea of paradise ? People's lives were a mess . When I came into the kitchen , May was sitting on the floor with her legs straight out and a box of graham crackers in her lap . That would be about right—me and May the only two who couldn't lie peaceful on the bed for five minutes . I saw a roach , she said , reaching into a bag of marshmallows that I hadn't noticed was there . She pulled one out and pinched off little pieces of it . Crazy May . I opened the refrigerator and stood there staring at the contents like I was waiting for the grape juice bottle to jump in my hand and say , Here , drink me . I could not seem to register what May was doing . Sometimes things of magnitude settle over you with excruciating slowness . Say you break your ankle and don't feel it hurting till you've walked another block . I had nearly finished a glass of juice before I let myself look at the little highway of broken graham crackers and marshmallow bits that May was constructing across the floor , how it started at the sink and angled toward the door , thick with golden crumbs and smudges of sticky white . The roaches will follow this out the door , May said . It works every time . I don't know how long I stared at the line on the floor , at May's face turned toward mine , eager for me to say something , but I couldn't think what to say . The room filled with the steady whir of the refrigerator motor . I felt a strange , thick feeling inside . A memory . I stood there waiting , letting it come . Your mother was a lunatic when it came to bugs , T . Ray had said . She used to make trails of graham cracker crumbs and marshmallows to lure roaches outside . I looked again at May . My mother couldn't have learned the roach trick from May , I thought . Could she ? Ever since I'd set foot in the pink house , some part of me had kept believing that my mother had been here . No , not believing it so much as daydreaming it and running it through a maze of wishful thinking . But now that the actual possibility seemed to be right in front of me , it seemed so far fetched , crazy . It couldn't be , I thought again . I walked over and sat down at the table . Shadows from late afternoon pushed into the room . They were peach tinted , fading in and out , and the kitchen was completely silent . Even the refrigerator hum had died away . May had turned back to her work . She seemed oblivious to me sitting there . My mother could have learned it from a book , maybe from her mother . How did I know that households everywhere didn't use this particular roach ridding method ? I stood up and walked over to May . I felt a trembly feeling at the back of my knees . I put my hand on her shoulder . Okay , I thought , here goes . I said , May , did you ever know a Deborah ? Deborah Fontanel ? A white woman from Virginia ? It would have been a long time ago . There wasn't a trace of cunning in May , and you could depend on her not to overthink her answers . She didn't look up , didn't pause , just said , Oh , yes , Deborah Fontanel . She stayed out there in the honey house . She was the sweetest thing . And there it was . There it all was . For a moment I felt light headed . I had to reach for the countertop to steady myself . Down on the floor the trail of crumbs and marshmallows looked half alive . I had a million more questions , but May had started humming Oh ! Susanna . She set down the box of crackers and got up slowly , starting to sniffle . Something about Deborah Fontanel had set her off . I think I'll go out to the wall for a little while , she said . And that's how she left me , standing in the kitchen , hot and breathless , the world tilted under me . Walking to the honey house , I concentrated on my feet touching down on the hard caked dirt in the driveway , the exposed tree roots , fresh watered grass , how the earth felt beneath me , solid , alive , ancient , right there every time my foot came down . There and there and there , always there . The things a mother should be . Oh , yes , Deborah Fontanel . She stayed out there in the honey house . She was the sweetest thing . In the honey house I sat on the cot with my knees drawn up , hugging them with my arms and making a shelf for the side of my face to rest on . I looked at the floor and the walls with brand new eyes . My mother had walked about in this room . A real person . Not somebody I made up but a living , breathing person . The last thing I expected was to fall asleep , but when there's a blow to the system , all the body wants to do is go to sleep and dream on it . I woke an hour or so later in the velvety space where you don't yet remember what you've dreamed . Then suddenly the whole thing washed back to me . I am constructing a spiraling trail of honey across a room that seems to be in the honey house one minute and the next in my bedroom back in Sylvan . I start it at a door I've never seen before and end it at the foot of my bed . Then I sit on the mattress and wait . The door opens . In walks my mother . She follows the honey , making twists and turns across the room until she gets to my bed . She is smiling , so pretty , but then I see she is not a normal person . She has roach legs protruding through her clothes , sticking through the cage of her ribs , down her torso , six of them , three on each side . I couldn't imagine who sat in my head making this stuff up . The air was now dusky rose and cool enough for a sheet . I pulled it around my legs . My stomach felt icky , like I might throw up . If I told you right now that I never wondered about that dream , never closed my eyes and pictured her with roach legs , never wondered why she came to me like that , with her worst nature exposed , I would be up to my old habit of lying . A roach is a creature no one can love , but you cannot kill it . It will go on and on and on . Just try to get rid of it . The next few days I was a case of nerves . I jumped out of my skin if somebody so much as dropped a nickel on the floor . At the dinner table I poked at my food and stared into space like I was in a trance . Sometimes the picture of my mother with roach legs would leap into my head , and I would have to swallow a spoonful of honey for my stomach . I was so antsy I couldn't sit through five minutes of American Bandstand on television , when ordinarily I was glued to Dick Clark's every word . I walked around and around the house , pausing here and there to picture my mother in the various rooms . Sitting with her skirt spread over the piano bench . Kneeling beside Our Lady . Studying the recipe collection that May clipped from magazines and kept taped on the refrigerator . I would stare at these visions with my eyes glazed over , only to look up and see August , or June , or Rosaleen watching me . They clucked their tongues and felt my face for fever . They said , What's wrong ? What's got into you ? I shook my head . Nothing , I lied . Nothing . In truth I felt as if my life was stranded out on the high dive , about to leap into unknown waters . Dangerous waters . I only wanted to postpone the plunge awhile , to feel my mother's closeness in the house , to pretend I wasn't afraid of the story that had brought her here or that she might go and surprise me the way she had in the dream , turning up six legged and ugly . I wanted to march up to August and ask why my mother had been here , but fear stopped me . I wanted to know , and I didn't want to know . I was all hung up in limbo . Late Friday afternoon , after we had finished cleaning the last of the supers and storing them away , Zach went out to take a look under the hood of the honey wagon . It was still acting funny and overheating , in spite of Neil having worked on it . I wandered back to my room and sat on my cot . Heat radiated from the window . I considered getting up to turn on the fan but only sat there staring through the panes at the milky blue sky , a sad , ragged feeling catching hold inside . I could hear music coming from the truck radio , Sam Cooke singing Another Saturday Night , then May calling across the yard to Rosaleen , something about getting the sheets off the clothesline . And I was struck all at once how life was out there going through its regular courses , and I was suspended , waiting , caught in a terrible crevice between living my life and not living it . I couldn't go on biding time like there was no end of it , no end to this summer . I felt tears spring up . I would have to come clean . Whatever happened well , it would just happen . I went over to the sink and washed my face . Taking a deep breath , I stuffed my mother's black Mary picture and her photograph into my pocket and started toward the pink house to find August . I thought we would sit down on the end of her bed , or out in the lawn chairs if the mosquitoes weren't bad . I imagined August would say , What's on your mind , Lily ? Are we finally gonna have our talk ? I would pull out the wooden picture and tell her every last thing , and then she would explain about my mother . If only that had happened , instead of what did .